Our Partners and Contributors
This website was developed in partnership with clinical experts and people with lived experience. 
We are grateful for the commitment and generosity of all who assisted in developing the site, and for their valuable contributions to learn, connect and empower.
Website Advisory Committee
The Heart Hub is the result of the vision and spirit of our Advisory Committee who guided the project at every step. 

Dina Theodoropoulos, co-chair and caregiver
Dr. Cindy Yip, caregiver 
Coleen Power, nurse practitioner, Cardio-Oncology, UHN
Heather Cartwright, patient 
Kyle, patient  
Dr. Michael McDonald, cardiologist and director, Heart Function and Transplantation Program
Nadia Thomson, nurse practitioner, Heart Function Program, UHN
Dr. Natasha Aleksova, cardiologist, UHN 
Paula Henderson, patient 
Dr. Phyllis Billia, Cardiologist and Director of Research, Peter Munk Cardiac Centre, UHN
Dr. Rob Nolan, clinical psychologist, UHN
Santa Cuda, caregiver 
Shelagh Ross, patient

The Advisory committee and this project were overseen and supported by Ted Rogers Centre for Heart Research staff:

Anne Simard, co-chair and staff scientist
Aimy Wang, biomedical communications student
Augusta Lipscombe, research and communications specialist
Samantha Engbers, research planning associate

 



















Go To Contact Us



In addition to the many contributions of our Advisory Committee members who also wrote and reviewed content, we benefitted from an incredible group of contributors. 
Thank you to our collaborating and contributing experts who shared their impactful and heartfelt stories and medical, clinical, or lived experience: 

Dr. Aamir Jeewa, Section Head, Cardiomyopathy & Heart Function, Division of Cardiology, SickKids
Annie Smith, Person with lived experience
Dr. Heather Ross, Head, Division of Cardiology, UHN and Site-Lead, Ted Rogers Centre for Heart Research
Isabel Victal, Person with lived experience
Jane McCarthy, Director, Programs and Services, Ontario Caregiver Organization
Kristen George, Nurse Practitioner, SickKids
Laurel Sproule, Person with lived experience
Dr. Leah Steinberg, Physician, Mount Sinai Hospital
Lisa Salapatek, Executive Lead, Strategic Partnerships and Innovation, Ontario Caregiver Organization
Lori Constable-Smolcic, person with lived experience
Maddison Large, Person with lived experience
Margaret Brum, Registered Dietician, UHN
Mike Walker, Exercise Physiologist, UHN
Nancy Cunliffe, Person with lived experience
Noli Mosquite, Person with lived experience
Dr. Robert Maunder, Deputy Psychiatrist-in-Chief and Head of Psychiatry Research, Sinai Health
Sharon Bray, Person with lived experience.

And finally, thank you to all our testers and reviewers who assisted along the way.