Research Outcomes and Reports
Clinicians and researchers at Ted Rogers Centre for Heart Research are constantly working to accelerate the discovery of new approaches to treating heart failure and cardiotoxicity. Each publication and report draws on findings from an earlier study and lays the groundwork for a future one, propelling advancements in care forward. 
Visit the main TRCHR website for articles and news on the latest studies as well as stories about our researchers. 
Below is a sample of foundational reports and recent research studies.
 
Reduction of Dietary Sodium to Less than 100 mmol in Heart Failure (SODIUM-HF): An International, Open-Label, Randomised, Controlled Trial
Justin A Ezekowitz, Eloisa Colin-Ramirez, Heather Ross, et al. April 2022
Patients with heart failure are frequently recommended to restrict their sodium intake to prevent fluid overload and associated adverse outcomes. To test the degree to which a reduction in dietary sodium impacts the incidence of future clinical events, the research team designed the SODIUM-HF study. This is the largest randomized clinical trial investigating sodium reduction and heart failure to date.
The study found that a dietary intervention to reduce sodium intake did not reduce clinical events in ambulatory patients with heart failure, but does improve heart failure symptoms and quality of life.
Read the full article.
 
Digital Technology Application for Improved Responses to Health Care Challenges: Lessons Learned from COVID-19.
Darshan H Brahmbhatt, Heather J Ross, Yasbanoo Moayedi. December, 2021.
The COVID-19 pandemic highlighted the need for shifts in care paradigms and technology, including advances in telemedicine, remote patient monitoring, and emerging wearable technologies.
This review article summarizes the most recent recommendation of the Virtual Care Task Force for scaling virtual medical services in Canada and propose a model for optimal implementation of health digital innovations with five tenets: 1) data management, 2) data security, 3) digital biomarkers, 4) useful artificial intelligence, and 5) clinical integration.
Read the review article.
 
Heart & Stroke 2022 Spotlight on Heart Failure
Falling Short: How Canada is Failing People with Heart Failure – and how we can change that
This report takes a critical look at the growing burden of heart failure in Canada, as well as innovative new research that points to hope for the future.
 
A Roadmap for Improving Integrated Heart Failure Care in Ontario.
CorHealth Ontario. March, 2019.
The purpose of this document is to provide recommendations and guidance to heart failure care providers and leaders across Ontario around implementing integrated and evidence-based heart failure care. In doing so, it outlines the Integrating Heart Failure Care Initiative (IHFCI), and presents the learnings gained from 3 Early Adopter Teams in Ontario. The key learnings to date are summarized as a “Roadmap for Improving Integrated Heart Failure Care” with recommendations around how to implement a model of integrated care delivery and a heart failure care quality standard.
Read the roadmap.
 
Trusted Sources
With an abundance of information available at our fingertips, it can be difficult to know what sources to trust. Below is a list of reputable sources of scientific information and research.

Canadian Journal of Cardiology
CJC Open
Cardiac Failure Review
European Heart Journal
International Journal of Cardiology
International Journal of Cardiology: Congenital Heart Disease
Journal of Congenital Cardiology
McGill Journal of Medicine
Science Direct
Tech Science Press
The Lancet
The New England Journal of Medicine.

To learn more about what online information to trust, read this guide from CADTH, Canada’s independent not-for-profit organization that gives evidences on optimal use of drugs and medical devices in our health care system:
Evaluating the Credibility of Health Websites: Can you Trust Dr. Google

Learn about our Patient Appreciation Policy