Studies in Recruitment
Research is key to transforming heart failure care and empowering patients and their caregivers to live better. 
We can’t do it without you. Consider joining a research team or participating in a study underway.
Please note: Each study has its own set of criteria to determine who can participate. This depends on the research question being asked and may include restrictions based on age, behaviours, health status, location, or other traits.
Before enrolling in a study, researchers may ask questions to determine if you are eligible to participate. In some cases, you may have to undergo specific testing, like a blood test or physical exam, to determine whether you can participate.
Interested in recruiting on The Heart Hub?
If you are interested in having your research study posted for recruitment, please complete the online submission form.


Perception of Advanced Heart Failure Patients, Caregivers, and Clinicians on Zero-effort Heart Failure Monitoring Technology

We want your feedback!
At Balliscor, we are developing a completely unobtrusive monitoring solution that doesn’t rely on wearable devices. We invite you to a 30-minute virtual meeting to discuss our technology and collect your feedback. If you are an individual with heart failure or taking care of your loved one with heart failure, you are eligible to participate. A $20 gift card will be provided for your time.
If you’d like to participate, please send an email to contact@balliscor.com.

From Clinical Pathways to Service Models: Towards a Person-centered Approach for Remote Patient Monitoring
Women’s College Hospital Institute of Health System Solutions and Virtual Care (WIHV) is leading a quality improvement initiative on remote patient monitoring. This project titled “From Clinical Pathways to Service Models: Towards a Person-centered Approach for Remote Patient Monitoring” aims to better understand the design and delivery of remote patient monitoring as a person-centred and equity promoting model of care.
The research team is seeking patients and caregivers with experience participating in any type of remote patient monitoring program. Your role would include providing your unique perspective on a person-centred approach to remote patient monitoring as a model of care. This will take place during a two-hour virtual feedback session with other patients and caregivers. Participants will be compensated for their time. Your perspectives will be a valuable addition to this initiative and could lead to a better understanding of designing and delivering person-centred remote patient monitoring programs.
For those interested in learning more about the opportunity, please contact Vanessa Kishimoto at vanessa.kishimoto@wchospital.ca. To learn more about the work WIHV does, click here.

From the Heart: Canadian women’s lived experiences of heart failure

Access the interview consent form

SPOR Patient and Public Topic Suggestions
SPOR Evidence Alliance
At the SPOR Evidence Alliance, we value the importance of patient identified priorities in shaping the health research landscape, and ultimately informing changes across the health system that address patient needs.


If you are interested in a health topic that you feel is important in improving patient health outcomes and the health system, we would like to hear about it.
Who can submit a health topic?We welcome all interested patients and members of the public to propose topics for future SPOR Evidence Alliance projects.




What topics are appropriate?We would like to hear about health topics that identify an opportunity to improve health outcomes, medical or public health practice, and health systems in Canada.
Please note that it is not necessary to submit your topic as a structured research question. If your topic is selected for further study, we will work with you to develop the question.
Submit a topic here



TRANSFORM HF Peer Review Panels
Dr. Heather Ross and Dr. Craig Simmons
TRANSFORM HF funds research and trainees focused on digital technologies for equitable access to high-quality personalized heart failure care. Our mission is also to enable patients to become more active in their own health and engage them in all of our programs. 
Competitions are described at: www.transformhf.ca/opportunities Patients, caregivers and family members living with heart failure are integral members of our review panel to select funded projects and trainees. If you are interested in joining a panel, email info@transformhf.ca.


Go To Patient Appreciation Policy